DAY 1

1. What is a LLM?

Neural networks designed to understand, generate and respond to human like texts.
These are deep neural networks trained on massive amounts of text data.

2. Large ? Language models? 

Large since these models have billions of parameters.

Language models since these models do a wide range of NLP tasks, question answering, translations,
sentiment analysis and much more.

3. How are these different from earlier NLP models

LLMs can do wide range of NLP tasks and earlier NLP models were
designed for specific tasks like language translations etc.









DAY 2 

1. Why finetune after pre train?

To make our model task specific

Pretraining is a unsuvpervised learning and its auto regression because after a word
is predicted it is taken into the training loop i guess and the next word is predicted
and it goes on.

Finetuning is mostly done on labelled data.


Steps for building a LLM : 

1. Train on a large corpus of raw text data.
Raw text means here regular text without any labelling information

2. First training stage of LLM is also called Pretraining to create a foundational model

3. After obtaining the pretrained LLM, we can further train LLM on labelled data.

4. There are two types of popular finetuning 
    a. Instruction finetuning- 
        Labelled dataset consists of Instruction answer pairs.

    b. Classification Tasks-
        Labelled datet consist of text and associated labels


5. Transformers - 

Transformers are the backbone of most state-of-the-art LLMs because
they support parallel processing, advanced context awareness, and highly 
scalable training, all thanks to self-attention mechanisms.

PS : attention is all you need is a beautiful paper.

Steps -
1. Input text sent
2. Preprocessing Steps
    a. Tokenization - Breaking down words and sentences and assigning ids

3. Encoder 
    a. Vector embedding is implemented on Preproccessed texts 
    This is very important to ensure semantics hold even after assigning numerical ids.
    Each token is a number, but numbers dont hold grammar semantics or meaning so we convert
    them into vectors embeddings.

4. Embeddings generated in multi dimensional manner.

5. Decoder 
    a. The vector embeddings are fed to decoder
       During use Decoder only gets Encoder output and previously generated tokens(what is has
       said so far)
       From these it predicts the next word.

Note : One word predicted at a time.

Attention mechanism - Allows us to model the dependencies between words without regards to how close
apart or how far apart the words are.

Self attention- Is an attention mechanism relating different positions of a single sequence in order to
compute a representation of the sequence.
It means it alows model to weigh importance od different words/tokens relative to each other.
It helps us capture long range dependenciesso that the model can look both far behind and closer to identify
the next word.

BERT - Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers

Predicts hidden words in a given sentence.
It masks a word randomly and try to predict those words.
It recieves inputs where words are randomly masked during training.

GPT - Generative Pretrained Transformers
It tried to generate one word at a time. 
Tries to predict the right most word(last word).

BERT has to pay attention to all parts of sentence since random words 
missing thus it performs well on sentiment analysis task.

BERT is Bidirectional because it has to look from both direction where as GPT has to look
for one side only.

BERT is encoder only model.
GPT is decoder only model.

Not all Transformersare LLMs
Transformers can be used for several tasks.
LLMs are one of many applications of transformers.

Not LLMs are transformers as well.
LLMs can bee RNN or CNN architecture as well.






DAY 3
Auto regressive models - Models that uses previous outputs as input for fututre predictions

Compared to original transformer architecture GPT architecture is much simpler
In GPT architecture: there is no encoder we just have the decoder.

Original Transformer: 6 encoder decoder blocks
GPT 3: 96 transformer layers 175 billion parameter.

Emergent Behaviour: GPT was trained only for next word prediction, but it can perform many language tasks
this is called as Emergent Behaviour.

Zero shot learner and Few shot learner: Zero-shot learning uses models to handle new tasks without any explicit 
training examples, while few-shot learning provides a few examples to guide the model on a specific task. 


Stages Of Building A LLM From Scratch: 

Stage 1: 
    a. Data preparation and Sampling
    b. Attention mechanism
    c. LLM architecture
Implement data sampling and understand basic mechanism. 

Stage 2: Pretraining
    a. Training loop
    b. Model evaluation
    c. Load pretrained weights
Goal is to build a foundational model. Pretrain the llm on unlabeled data.

Stage 3:
    a. Finetuning for Classification
    b. Finetuning for Personal Assitant
Finetuning the model for different tasks.






DAY 4

Building a tokenizer

Step 1: 
We convert texts to tokenized text
    text                    Tokenized text
"This is an exmaple" => "This" "is" "an" "example"

Step 2: 
Convert them into token ids
                        This    is  an     example
Assigned token ids   =>  4013   201 302    1134

Step 3: 
Convert token ids to token embeddings which are fed to GPT

Traditional word wise tokenization :

Now, for complete training of dataset we convert to tokenized text
From that we develop vocabulary : arranging in alphabetical order and assigning ids
Each unique token is mapped to an unique integer called tokenID.

This is called encoding of each word

Later these numbers reversed back to strings via method called decode  

But this creates problem so we use BYTE PAIR ENCODING(BPE : ])

Additionally we add two more token ids 
<|unk|> : unknown
<|endoftext|> : end of text and another text has started. added between texts.
to make things easier for us. 

The above was word based encoding.


GPT only needs endoftext and nothing else. GPT uses BPE to break words into
subword units.

BYTE PAIR ENCODING (BPE):

Used in all modern LLMs.
Its a subwrd based tokenization algo.

Rules :
1. Do not split frequently used words into smaller subwords
2. Split the rare words into smaller, meaningful, subwords.

Advantages of subword tokenization:
1. The subword splitting helps the model learn that different
words with same root word as token like tokens and tokenizing have
similar meaning.

2. It also helps the model learn that tokenization and modernization are
made up of different root words.


BPE algo : Most common pair of consecutive bytes of data is replaced with 
a byte that does not occur in data.

We find pair of consecutive bytes that occure most in data and replac them 
with bytes that does not occur in data.

Example : og data : aaabdaaabac
a. The byte pair 'aa' occurs the most like twice in aaab and twice in aaabac 
in three initial a's. Now we will replace it wirh Z as Z does not occur in the data.

b. Compressed data : ZabdZabac

c. The next pair occuring mostly is ab. We will replace it with you
New data : ZYdZYac

d. Nothing to compress more can be compressed over ZY to WdWac.

How BPE helps in LLMs ?
a. BPE ensures that most common words in the vocabulary are represented
as a single token, while rare words are broken down into two or more subword 
tokens.

This continues till token count reached.




Day 5:

Now we build.